Abstract
Rates of physical inactivity continue to rise in the United States. With this work, we tested the efficacy of a strategy affecting the scope of visual attention designed to promote walking as a form of exercise. Specifically, we examined the influence of narrowed attention on the frequency (Studies 1a, 1b, and 3) and efficiency (Studies 2 and 4) of physical activity in general (Studies 1 and 2) and within exercise bouts measured across multiple days (Studies 3 and 4). We provide convergent evidence by investigating both individual differences in (Studies 1 and 2) and experimentally manipulated patterns of visual attention orienting (Studies 3 and 4). We discuss implications of attentional strategies for self-regulation and fitness.
Introduction
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’s most recent Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans estimated that only 26% of adult men, 19% of adult women, and 20% of adolescents meet recommendations for daily exercise each week (Piercy et al., 2018). This failure to engage in regular exercise comes with sociocultural costs. Accounting for 18% of deaths, physical inactivity and resulting obesity have surpassed smoking to become the leading cause of premature and preventable death in the United States (Taksler & Rothberg, 2017).
Why do individuals struggle to engage in regular exercise? The reasons are many. Too little time, motivation, energy, and confidence are regularly cited as barriers to routine physical activity (Bandura, 2004; Martin & Dubbert, 1982; Sallis & Hovell, 1990; Sallis, Hovell, & Hofstetter, 1992). In addition, people lack established habits, ineffectively manage the pain and discomfort experienced, and as a result anticipate undesirable outcomes of continuing an exercise routine (Gillebaart & Adriaanse, 2017; Sullivan et al., 2002).
Recent research adds one additional factor to this growing list of barriers. Perceptual experiences of exercise itself may contribute to physical inactivity. Specifically, exaggerated perceptual experiences of the environment in which people are exercising may give rise to a motivational profile that discourages action. When individuals see their environments as more extreme, they believe accomplishing exercise is less feasible (Balcetis, Cole, & Bisi, 2015). In particular, people who felt that a finish line was farther rather than closer subsequently experienced weakened expectations for task completion, reduced self-efficacy, increased perceptions of task difficulty, and tendencies to construe the exercise as a threat rather than challenge they were capable of taking on. Moreover, appraising exercise as less feasible impaired the quality of their activity. People walked slower and experienced the exercise as more painful when they believed it was too difficult to accomplish.
Given the consequences of visual representation for physical activity, researchers have attempted to identify the factors that give rise to perceptual experiences. Evidence suggests that people for whom exercise is more taxing, including those who are overweight, older, or experiencing chronic fatigue, perceive their environments in more extreme ways (Sugovic & Witt, 2011, 2013; Witt et al., 2009; for counterevidence and a lively debate regarding these findings, see Firestone, 2013; Proffitt, 2013; Schnall, 2017 and responses to this target article). People who felt tired judged a finish line as farther away than did people who felt full of energy (Cole & Balcetis, 2013). Similarly, individuals with a higher ratio of waist size to hip circumference believed a finish line was farther away than individuals with relatively leaner physical profiles (Balcetis et al., 2015).
If, as prior findings suggest, visual experience is implicated in physical inactivity, we propose that it may also serve as a strategy to promote action. We tested whether narrowing the scope of visual attention could improve the quantity and quality of physical activity for individuals when exercising.
Visual Attention in Goal Pursuit and Physical Activity
Attentional scope, or the spatial extent and proportion of visual environment about which individuals are aware of consciously consuming (e.g., Rowe, Hirsch, & Anderson, 2006), impacts how they perceive, appraise, and engage in physical activity. For instance, effective self-regulation requires the detection of goal-relevant means and opportunities in the environment (Parks-Stamm, Gollwitzer, & Oettingen, 2007; Shah & Kruglanski, 2003; Tolman, 1932/1951; Webb & Sheeran, 2004, 2007). In this way, the scope of visual attention serves as a spotlight (e.g., LaBerge, 1983; Posner, Snyder, & Davidson, 1980) or zoom lens (Eriksen & James, 1986; Eriksen & Yeh, 1985), highlighting opportunities that encourage effective goal pursuit.
Moreover, visual attention promotes goal-relevant outcomes related to physical movement. When people oriented eye gaze on a goal, focusing visual attention narrowly rather than expansively, they engaged in more effective exercise. For example, when they were motivated to exercise, people who narrowed their attention on the finish line compared with when they expanded their attention around their environment walked to the finish line faster and felt that the physical exertion required was less (Cole, Riccio, & Balcetis, 2014). Similarly, although unfit individuals perceived distances to a finish line as greater than fit individuals, when unfit individuals narrowly focused their visual attention on the goal, they perceived it as just as close as did their fit counterparts, believed they could accomplish the task, and subsequently improved the quality of their exercise (Balcetis et al., 2015). Just as people disengage from tasks they appraise as too difficult to accomplish but increase efforts to complete those they believe are possible even if challenging to achieve (Contrada, Wright, & Glass, 1984; Wright & Gendolla, 2012), narrowed attention shifts appraisals of exercise. Narrowed attention leads people to see the goal as closer and the likelihood of achieving the goal as greater, which improves the quality of physical activity.
The Present Research
The present research sought to examine the influence of visual attention on physical activity in individuals’ daily lives over time. Substantial health benefits arise from frequent or efficient activity. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advises a minimum of 150 min of moderate-intensity exercise each week even if divided across multiple sessions or 75 min of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity each week. With insufficient time being a highly cited barrier to exercise (Sallis & Hovell, 1990; Sallis et al., 1992), increasing efficiency by promoting more intense activity may promote physical activity. In this work, we tested the effectiveness of a visual attention–based strategy that might increase the frequency and efficiency of activity outside of the lab. If it is capable of contributing to lasting health benefits, visual attention must promote physical activity in an externally valid context beyond a single session of testing in the lab. Although single exercise sessions can have transient benefits on health (e.g., Thompson et al., 2001), improved health outcomes require continued engagement in physical activity (e.g., Warburton, Nicol, & Bredin, 2006).
In Studies 1a, 1b, and 2, we analyzed individuals’ reports regarding the visual features of their neighborhoods, their motivation to exercise, and their physical activity. We asked whether people who find that the contents of their environments capture their attention exercise more often and more efficiently than those with less visually engaging surroundings.
Results from these first three studies served as a basis for the development of strategy to increase the frequency and efficiency of walking that aimed to narrow the scope of visual attention. We experimentally assigned some participants to narrow their scope of visual attention, and we measured the effectiveness of narrowed scope for increasing the frequency (Study 3) and efficiency (Study 4) of physical activity over time, relative to a more natural way of orienting attention. We expected that randomly assigned use of narrowed attentional scope would increase physical relative to natural attentional styles.
Study 1a: Attention in Everyday Environments
Study 1a conducted a secondary data analysis, reanalyzing a subset of variables contained within a data set of New York City residents living in low-income neighborhoods (Duncan et al., 2014). We focused on indices of attentional scope, weight goal type, frequency of physical activity, and objective indicators of the size of participants’ activity space.
As a primary hypothesis, we predicted that individuals who focused their visual attention while outside report more frequent physical activity than individuals who focused less. We expected that the relationship between narrowed attention scope and activity would hold even after adjusting for the size of the geographical space in which participants spend their day. It is possible that the number of attention-capturing objects increases as neighborhood size increases. That is, people who are engaged with geographical areas of larger size may report that what they consider to be their neighborhood includes more interesting items. To adjust for potential confounding effects stemming from differences in participants’ geographic mobility, we included neighborhood size as assessed through GPS data. Finally, as a secondary hypothesis, we investigated moderating effects of the type of goal related to weight participants held, investigating the impact on physical activity among people who held a goal to lose weight compared with those who held other weight loss goals.
Method
Participants and measures
We reanalyzed data from the NYC Low-Income Housing, Neighborhoods and Health Study (Duncan et al., 2014). Participants in that study (n = 120) were recruited through community-based outreach flyers distributed outside of public housing developments and in community organizations in four New York City neighborhoods. Most (80%) of the participants reported living in public housing, and all reported being low-income.
Participants completed a variety of measures, including questions assessing features of their neighborhood, feelings and attitudes, demographics, and health. They received a QStarz BT-Q1000XT GPS tracking unit, which they were asked to wear at all times over the next 7 days, except when sleeping, swimming, or showering. GPS track points were recorded in 30-s intervals over this time. Rates of compliance were high, with 95% of the sample providing GPS data (Duncan et al., 2014).
We focused our analysis on three survey items and one aggregated GPS measure relevant to our study purposes (see supplemental material for measures and scripts of all studies). As participants could refrain from answering any question, our final survey data set included responses from 108 individuals who answered all questions of interest. As participants could also refrain from wearing the tracking unit, our final GPS data set included tracking data from 102 individuals. Of the participants (65 females, two gender undisclosed; Mage = 38.4, SD = 14.3), 77% (n = 92) were African American or Black, 15% (n = 18) were White, less than 1% (n = 1) were Asian, and 7.5% (n = 9) reported other or did not answer. The average body mass index (BMI) of the sample was 29.4 (SD = 8.0), with 32% registering as overweight and 44% as obese.
To assess narrowed attentional scope, we analyzed responses to the following question: “There are many interesting things to look at while walking in your neighborhood. Would you say that you . . .” Participants responded by indicating strongly disagree (coded as 1), somewhat disagree (2), somewhat agree (3), strongly agree (4), or don’t know/not sure (received no score). We defined narrowed attention as stronger agreement with the statement, given that individuals could narrow attention so long as there was and they noticed something to focus on. Three people chose not to respond to this question.
To explore the effect of weight loss goals, we used participants’ responses to the question, “Which of the following are you trying to do about your weight?” Trying to lose weight was coded as −1 (n = 54), and all other responses (gain weight, stay the same weight) were coded as 1 (n = 63). To assess consistency of exercise, we analyzed responses to the following question: “In general, how physically active are you? Would you say are very active (coded 4), somewhat active (3), not very active (2), or not active at all (1).” Seven participants chose not to report on physical activity.
GPS data
To assess differences in participants’ geographic mobility, we included an objective individual-based measure of GPS activity space size (expressed in square miles). Activity spaces were derived for each participant from daily path areas using GPS point data, aggregated for each individual (range = 1.47-62.05, M = 13.41, SD = 9.15). This indexes individuals’ exposure to environments and general size of potential exercise activity space (Christian, 2012; Duncan, Regan, & Chaix, 2018; Hirsch, Winters, Clarke, & McKay, 2014; Zenk et al., 2011).
Results
Data transformations
In this study and all studies that follow, we mean-centered all continuous measures included as predictor variables in our analyses.
Predicting physical activity
As a primary, confirmatory investigation, we ran a regression predicting general physical activity from narrowed attentional scope, weight loss goals, and their interaction. The overall model was significant, R2 = .18, F(3, 104) = 7.83, p < .001. The main effect of narrowed attention was not significant, b = 0.03, t(104) = 0.48, p = .64, 95% CI = [–0.11, 0.17]. There was a main effect of weight loss goal, b = 0.70, t(104) = 3.49, p = .001, 95% CI = [0.30, 1.10], such that those who were trying to lose weight reported being less physically active than people trying to gain or remain the same weight.
The interaction between weight loss goals and narrowed attention was significant, b = −0.14, t(104) = 2.00, p = .049, 95% CI = [–0.28, –0.001] (see Figure 1). We conducted simple slope analyses to unpack this effect. Though we expected it to be, the effect of narrowed attentional scope on physical activity among people who reported the goal to lose weight was not significant, b = 0.18, t(104) = 1.69, p = .095, 95% CI = [–0.03, 0.38]. However, the pattern of results is consistent with our predictions; among those with a weight loss goal, the more things they reported as catching their attention in the neighborhood, the more physically active they reported being. As predicted, among those without weight loss goals, the effect of narrowed attention and activity was not significant, b = −0.11, t(104) = −1.12, p = .27, 95% CI = [0.02, 0.56].
Figure 1. The effect of narrowed attention plotted at 1 SD above and below the mean on physical activity among people with weight loss goals and people without a weight loss goal.
GPS activity space and visual attention
Within our primary, confirmatory investigation, we tested an alternative explanation that participants who move within larger activity spaces could have more interesting things to look at simply as a product of greater exposure to various environments. To do this, we ran a follow-up regression predicting self-reported physical activity from weight loss goals, narrowed attention, and their interaction and adjusted for the GPS-defined activity space for each participant. The overall model remained significant, R2 = .21, F(4, 87) = 5.77, p = .001. Importantly, we observed no significant effect of GPS-defined activity space on physical activity, b = −0.01, t(87) = −0.99, p = .32, 95% CI = [–0.03, 0.01]. All other analyses replicated the previously observed patterns: effect of weight loss goal, b = 0.71, t(87) = 3.22, p = .002, 95% CI = [0.27, 1.15], effect of narrowed attentional scope, b = 0.001, t(87) = 0.01, p = .99, 95% CI = [–0.15, 0.16], and the interaction, b = −0.13, t(87) = −1.66, p = .10, 95% CI = [–0.29, 0.03]; although we note that the interaction did not reach significance, the pattern is consistent with our predictions.
Study 1b: Replication
We conducted a preregistered high-powered confirmatory replication of Study 1a to investigate the effects of narrowed attentional scope on the frequency of physical activity. Moreover, we added a secondary, confirmatory investigation to better understand the nature of participants’ interpretations of the question assessing attentional scope. It is possible that participants who reported having many interesting things to see in the environment were narrowing their attention on the things that were of visual interest, as we hypothesized. It is also possible that those reporting many interesting things were adopting a broad, rather than narrowed, focus of attention as they shifted their attention around them when interesting things caught their eye. In this replication, we added additional questions to further explore these two possible interpretations of attentional scope. The preregistration materials are available at https://osf.io/pe73q/.
Method
Participants and measures
We used the online data collection company Research Now to recruit individuals from New York City (n = 103), Boston (n = 102), San Francisco (n = 100), and Washington, DC (n = 100). We selected New York to replicate the sample used in Study 1a and tested the generalizability of the effect to other large urban areas. We chose cities with high percentages of daily walking commuters as determined by census data and high indices of walkable neighborhoods.1 We set this sample size informed by a power analysis, conducted using G*Power 3.1 (Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, & Lang, 2009; Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007), basing our expected effect size off of the observed effect size in Study 1a—the interaction between narrowed attention and weight loss goals (b = 0.14, n = 110). This analysis suggested a minimum total sample size of 86 people, which we rounded up to 100 in anticipation of attrition. Given that we were exploring the generalizability of our effects beyond the single city of residence tested in Study 1a, we set a minimum of 100 participants from each of the four cities.
We set as inclusion criteria that participants must be residents of these four cities and 18 years of age or older. We did not specify that participants must be from low-income backgrounds as that was not an inclusion criterion in Study 1a; we note that total household income ranged from less than US$10,000 (n = 10) to more than US$150,000 (n = 92), with a median household income of between US$80,000 and US$89,999; participants responded using an ordinal scale with income gradations. In our preregistration, we specified that data would only be analyzed if respondents passed the attention check, to remove responses generated by random responders or online bots; as a result, we analyzed data from 405 individuals who answered all questions of interest and met the inclusion criteria. Of the participants (216 females; Mage = 49.1, SD = 16.2), 73% (n = 297) were White, 9% (n = 38) were African American or Black, 14% (n = 55) were Asian, and 4% (n = 15) were American Indian or Alaska native, Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, or other.
We designed survey questions to replicate the primary tests conducted in Study 1a in addition to expanding beyond in secondary analyses. Primary methods included measurements of attentional scope, as indexed by agreement with the statement, “There are many interesting things to look at while walking in your neighborhood,” using the same response options as in Study 1a. Participants reported weight loss goals; they responded to the question, “Which of the following are you trying to do about your weight?” Trying to lose weight was coded as −1 (n = 224), and all other responses (gain weight, stay the same weight) were coded as 1 (n = 181). Finally, participants responded to the question, “In general, how physically active are you? Would you say are very active (coded 4), somewhat active (3), not very active (2), or not active at all (1).”
Preregistered secondary investigations probed the possible interpretations of the measure of attentional scope. We provided participants with a single-item vivid description of repeated use of narrowed attentional scope, as we hypothesized it related to viewing experiences while engaged in physical activity outside. In particular, we described the approach in the following way:

    Your eyes and your attention are captured by interesting things around you. Your eyes stay fixed on this interesting thing for a while. You keep walking or running, and you pass by other things but they don’t seem to catch your eye. You move past them without noticing them. You instead stay focused on that eye-catching thing. At some point, you’ve walked or run past it, and that interesting thing is behind you. Then you find something else curious and visually-interesting that grabs your attention and you do this all again.

Participants reported the degree to which they agreed that this reflected the way in which they look around while walking or running outside using a strongly disagree (1) to neither agree nor disagree (4) to strongly agree (7) scale.
We also measured agreement with four simple statements describing attentional scope. Participants indicated agreement with statements including, “I look at one or two interesting things up ahead of me until I reach them” (Narrow1) and “my visual attention is narrowly focused” (Narrow2).2 Participants also responded to “my visual attention is spread broadly” (Broad1) and “my attention is captured by what’s in front and on the sides of me at the same time” (Broad2). Participants used a strongly disagree (1) to neither agree nor disagree (4) to strongly agree (7) Likert-type scale to respond.
Finally, participants indicated their current and ideal weight in pounds; 398 participants responded to both questions. We computed a difference score to index the degree to which they held the goal to lose weight.
Results
Predicting physical activity
As a primary confirmatory analysis, we replicated the statistical model in Study 1a; we ran a regression predicting self-reported physical activity in general from weight goals and narrowed attention, using responses to the statement regarding the interesting things to look at the neighborhood. The overall model was significant, R2 = .07, F(2, 398) = 11.67, p < .001. We found a main effect of narrowed attention, b = 0.22, t(398) = 4.34, p < .001, 95% CI = [0.12, 0.31], such that those with more interesting things to focus their attention on in their neighborhood reported more frequent physical activity than those without interesting things on which to focus their attention.3
In this model, we found a main effect of having a weight loss goal, b = 0.15, t(398) = 3.98, p < .001, 95% CI = [0.07, 0.22]. Those who were trying to lose weight reported more frequent physically activity than people with other weight goals. The interaction between weight loss goals and narrowed attention was not significant, b = 0.08, t(398) = 1.70, p = .09, 95% CI = [–0.13, 0.18] (see Supplemental Figure 1S for more details on this interaction).
We reran this regression replacing the categorical weight loss variable with the continuous measure of weight loss goals indexing the difference between the current and ideal weight. The results, which appear in the supplemental material, replicate. We consistently found a strong main effect of narrowed attention, and inconsistent evidence for the effect of narrowed attention was stronger among individuals with a goal to lose weight.
Specifying the nature of attentional scope
As secondary analyses, we investigated the relationship between participants’ descriptions of the interesting things in their neighborhood and the clarifying measures of attentional scope. First, there was a significant relationship between “many interesting things” and the single-item vivid description of attentional scope, r(401) = .29, p < .001. As participants found more interesting things in their neighborhood, the more they agreed that they fix their eyes on something ahead until they move beyond it and then reengaged attention narrowly again.
Next, we conducted a factor analysis with varimax rotation on Narrow1, Narrow2, Broad1, and Broad2. We observed two factors: Both statements describing narrowed attention loaded (weights: .69, .88) onto the first factor (Eigen = 1.2), and both statements describing broad attention loaded (weights: .81, .87) onto the second factor (Eigen = 1.7). However, the α of the narrow attention items was low (.44), as was the α for the broad attention items (.66). As specified in the preregistration, we did not average the narrow and broad attentional scope items as a result, but treated them instead as individual predictors. We ran a regression predicting participants’ agreement with the description that their neighborhood contains many interesting things from Narrow1, Narrow2, Broad1, and Broad2. The overall model was significant, R2 = .04, F(4, 397) = 3.62, p = .007. Narrow1 predicted agreement with descriptions of the interesting things in the neighborhood, b = 0.15, t(397) = 2.38, p = .02, 95% CI = [0.026, 0.283], variance inflation factor (VIF) = 1.22. The more participants reported looking at one or two interesting things up ahead until they reach them, the stronger their agreement that there were many interesting things to look at while walking in their neighborhood. Narrow2 did not account for a significant proportion of unique variance in the many interesting things statement, b = −0.03, t(397) = 0.49, p = .62, 95% CI = [–0.126, 0.075], VIF = 1.15, nor did Broad1, b = 0.07, t(397) = 0.98, p = .33, 95% CI = [–0.071, 0.212], VIF = 1.37, or Broad2, b = 0.08, t(397) = 1.15, p = .25, 95% CI = [–0.059, 0.226], VIF = 1.41.
We reran our primary model predicting physical activity from weight loss goals, Narrow1 and the vivid description of narrowed attention in a regression each separately, and the interaction between weight loss goal and each definition of narrowed attention. Narrow1 predicted physical activity, b = 0.12, t(401) = 3.92, p < .001, 95% CI = [0.059, 0.178]. In a separate model, the single-item vivid description of narrowed attentional scope predicted physical activity, b = 0.09, t(401) = 3.14, p = .002, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.22] (see the supplemental material for additional information on these models).
Summary
In this preregistered replication, across multiple operationalizations, we found consistent evidence that narrowed attentional scope facilitates physical activity. The more individuals narrow the scope of their visual attention, the more often they report engaging in physical exercise within multiple cities and regardless of income or race (see supplemental material for moderation investigations). Secondary analyses found that evidence that the beneficial effects of narrowed attention scope occur more so for individuals with weight loss goals was inconclusive.
Study 2
Studies 1a and 1b provided evidence that narrowed attentional scope promotes frequent physical activity. Study 2 expanded to ask whether narrow attentional scope promotes efficient physical activity; participants indicated the time it would take them to walk 1 mile quickly. As a primary hypothesis, we predicted that the more people adopt a narrowed attentional style while exercising, the greater the benefits for physical activity, as indexed by faster walking times. As a secondary hypothesis, we probed the moderating effect of holding a goal to lose weight.
Method
Participants
We recruited 225 participants from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk in exchange for financial compensation commensurate with the present going rate. Participants reported their gender, weight, and height in inches (MBMI = 28.6, SD = 7.5). They also indicated their racial group (184 White, 22 Black, 22 Asian, two Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, one other); 170 answered all questions and were included in analyses. Within the sections below, we describe missing data.
Procedures
Participants read two descriptions of the attention strategies that they could employ while exercising, presented in a randomized order. We described the narrowed attention strategy as follows:

    When they are exercising, some people create imaginary finish lines or destinations. They choose something like stop signs, buildings, or corners as goals. They focus their visual attention on them, like a spotlight shining just on that spot, until they reach them.

This was in contrast to an alternative strategy where we defined relatively more broad attentional scope as this:

    When they are exercising, some people look around. They take notice of the people on the street and the environment around them until they reach their destination. They allow their visual attention to wander all around them.

Following each description, participants indicated how often they use each strategy when they are struggling to walk or run outside. Response options included never (coded as 1), rarely (2), sometimes (3), frequently (4), and always (5). Five participants chose not to respond to one or both of these questions. From these ratings, we computed the difference score indexing the degree to which people use the narrowed attention strategy more so than the alternative attention strategy (M = 0.54, SD = 1.63).
To assess the efficiency of exercise, participants estimated how long it would take to walk 1 mile (1.6 km) if they were walking quickly. They reported in minutes and could indicate that they did not know (see supplemental material for additional analyses regarding responses of “I don’t know”). Two participants did not respond to this question, and 195 participants offered an estimate. One estimate was over 8 SDs larger than the mean; we replaced this estimate with the next highest estimate.
Finally, participants indicated their ideal weight in pounds. We subtracted their ideal weight from their current weight, such that higher numbers on this goal strength index indicate a stronger goal; three did not provide their current weight and 25 did not supply an answer for their ideal weight.
Results
As a primary hypothesis, we asked whether the use of narrowed attention improved the efficiency of their physical activity. As a secondary hypothesis, we explored whether narrowed attention’s effect on physical activity was moderated by the strength of participants’ weight loss goal. We ran a regression predicting time estimates for walking 1 mile from the narrowed attention index, weight loss goal, and their interaction. The overall model was significant, R2 = .10, F(3, 166) = 6.00, p = .001. There was a significant main effect of narrowed attention, b = −1.41, t(166) = −2.42, p = .016, 95% CI = [–2.552, –0.260]. Individuals who assumed a narrowed attentional scope more often reported walking or running 1 mile faster.
In addition, there was a main effect of weight loss goal, b = 0.12, t(166) = 3.93, p < .001, 95% CI = [.059, .178]. Individuals whose current weight was higher than their ideal weight reported taking longer to walk a mile than those whose current weight was more closely aligned with their ideal weight. The interaction was not significant, b = −0.043, t(166) = −2.00, p = .051, 95% CI = [–0.087, 0.000] (see supplemental material and Supplemental Figure 3S for details on this interaction).
Study 3: Attention Intervention and Longitudinal Frequency of Exercise
Relying on self-reported attentional styles, the three previous studies supported the primary hypothesis that narrowed attentional scope improves physical activity. Study 3 experimentally assigned individuals to either adopt a narrowed attentional scope or, in the control condition, to attend to their surroundings as they naturally would in a relatively broader manner.
Moreover, we assigned all participants the same goal, to isolate the impact of attentional strategies among all people working toward the same objective—to walk 15 min. We allowed the number of walks to vary but provided a goal range. We asked participants to walk between 5 and 7 times over the course of the next week. As frequent physical activity confers great health benefits (e.g., Wirth, Atzor, & Schmidtbleicher, 2002), we tested whether training people to narrowly focus attention on a goal could increase the frequency of exercise. By prescribing an amount of time to walk, but allowing for variability in the number of walks taken, we could probe the effects of attentional scope on frequency of activity over the course of 1 week. We predicted that people taught to narrowly focus attentional scope would exercise more often than those attending as they naturally would.
Method
Participants
One hundred nine participants (64 females; Rangeage = 18-59, Mage = 22.5, SD = 5.7) who participated described as investigating exercise ability in exchange for US$10. We opened data collection for a period of 2 weeks to allow for additional time to track exercise for the week that followed the attention training session. In accordance with suggested heuristics for minimal sample sizes at the time of conducting this study (Simmons, Nelson, & Simonsohn, 2011, 2013), we set a sample minimum of 100 participants to ensure at least 50 subjects per cell in the experimental design. We conducted a sensitivity analysis using G*Power for a two-tailed test of the difference between independent means (α = .05), supplying the stated sample sizes, and observed that we would have 80% power to detect an effect size of .542.
Procedure
We met all participants in a nearby outdoor public park. An experimenter collected measurements of participants’ weight, waist, and hip measurements (MBMI = 24.5 SD = 5.0). They reported their age (M = 23.5, SD = 5.7) and race (44 White, five Black, 37 Asian, 21 Latin/Hispanic, two not reported). We randomly assigned them to one of two attention conditions to practice with the researcher. All participants saw a cone ahead in their direct path. Participants in the Narrowed Attention condition (n = 54) were instructed to focus their eyes on the cone. They pretended that there was a spotlight shining only on the orange cone. They were asked not to look around. Those in the Natural Attention condition (n = 55) were instructed, as they looked around, to use whatever strategy they found to be most helpful. They could look around or take a few glances at the cone or at whatever caught their attention.
Next, the experimenter gave all participants a common exercise goal, to complete between five and seven 15-min walks within the next week and to record their activity daily. Because we defined the time requirement for the goal, we focused our investigation on the frequency of physical activity, the variable aspect of the assignment, as measured by number of walks completed.
We instructed participants to use their assigned attention strategy. They should continually adopt this strategy as they moved through their space. We asked participants to take these walks in addition to any walking or exercise done on a regular day, including walking to or from school or work. We also told them that they should not stop or reduce their current exercise routine during the week. Furthermore, we clarified that these walks should be taken alone, without talking on the phone. We gave explicit instructions on how to record their walking data using the Map My Walk mobile smartphone application, which could track their physical activity in real time using GPS sensors built in to their smartphones. Following each goal-related walk, participants took a snapshot of their results. The experimenter asked participants to submit the data from each exercise completed at our request to our email address or through text. We verified a walk occurred, recorded the number of walks taken during the week, and eliminated submissions that indicated movement occurred as a result of subway or car trips, given that such patterns of movement would not conform to the street grid or suggested a path traveled that would be impossible on foot (e.g., through underground subway tunnels).
Results
As a primary confirmatory hypothesis, we asked whether the narrowed rather than natural attentional scope encouraged more frequent exercise for the week that followed. Individuals assigned to narrowed attention engaged in more walks in the week that followed (M = 4.2, SD = 1.7) than individuals assigned to attend naturally (M = 3.5, SD = 2.2), although the effect failed to meet the conventional threshold for significance, t(107) = 1.95, p = .054, d = .37, 95% CI = [–1.5108, .0125]. Our sensitivity power analysis suggests we might have been underpowered to detect the observed effect size, but the pattern is consistent with our reasoning and with the other studies reported in this article.
Study 4: Attention Intervention and Longitudinal Efficiency of Exercise
In Study 3, narrowed attention training increased the frequency of exercise during the next week. In Study 4, we altered our task instructions such that we could extend our investigation to predict the efficiency of exercise, as intense as well as frequent exercise confers additional health benefits (e.g., Dunn, Trivedi, & O’Neal, 2001; Warburton et al., 2006). To do this, we reran Study 3 holding constant across studies the following aspects of the design. Participants were instructed to go for walks during the week that followed that lasted 15 min each. These walks should be in addition to any normal physical activity as described in Study 3. In Study 4, we made the following amendments. Although number of walks varied in Study 3, here we specified precisely the number of walks the goal required; we asked participants to walk exactly 5 times in 7 days. We expected no differences between attention strategy conditions on time spent walking or number of walks taken—a null result that would indicate that participants were equally likely to comply with task instructions regardless of the attention condition. Moreover, this constraint allowed us to reduce differences in individuals’ exercise frequency to isolate the impact of our strategy solely on efficiency of movement. We indexed efficiency through the number of steps taken and miles traversed during the bounded exercise interval.
Method
Participants
One hundred twenty-one participants (85 females, two undisclosed) completed the study in exchange for US$5 for completing the lab portion, US$1 for every daily dairy submission, and a US$8 bonus if all seven diaries were completed. The study remained open for 2 months; participants were recruited during a 6-week window of time, which allowed for time following their attention training session to track their exercise longitudinally. We set as a minimum sample size of 100 participants to ensure a minimum of 50 people per condition, recommended at the time of conducting this study (Simmons et al., 2011, 2013). We conducted a sensitivity analysis using G*Power for a two-tailed test of the difference between independent means (α = .05), supplying ns = 61 and 59, and observed that we would have 80% power to detect an effect size of .516.
Procedure
We recruited participants from the New York City area for a week-long study of exercise habits. Upon visiting the lab, an experimenter collected measurements of participants’ weight, waist, and hip measurements; one person opted out of having these measurements taken (MBMI = 24.7 SD = 4.3). They reported their age (M = 25.7, SD = 7.4) and race (43 White, 33 Black, 14 Asian, 14 Latin/Hispanic, 13 Southeast Asian, one Native American, four other).
Next, we trained participants in the narrowed attention condition (n = 61) to focus their attention on only one target at a time, selecting a new target once the previous mark was reached. We trained participants randomly assigned to the natural attention condition (n = 60) to look around the environment as they naturally would, in whatever way they found to be most helpful following the same protocol as in Study 3.
The experimenter explained that we would monitor exercise over 7 days. We asked them to complete five different 15-min walks within the next week and to record their data on a smartphone application that recorded their total number of steps taken, as well as miles and minutes walked. Importantly, we again instructed participants to continue to use their attention strategy throughout each of these walks and specified the same constraints on when, with whom, and for what purpose these walks could be taken, as in Study 3. They submitted screenshots of their walks as in Study 3. One participant in the natural attention condition experienced technical problems and could only track the number of minutes taken per goal-directed walk; analyses reported below reflect these lost data. To increase compliance and remind participants of the attention strategy, the experimenter collected participants’ cell phone numbers. We sent a text message reminder to all participants each morning during the 1 week reminding them to either “zoom in” or “look naturally” as they completed their five walks.
Participants also completed a daily online survey in the week following their lab visit asking about their walking experiences that day. We report the measures collected in the supplement.
Results
Predicting instruction adherence
As an internal check, we first tested whether visual attention instructions affected the extent to which participants adhered to the task instructions to complete five different 15-min walks within the next week. We found that attention condition did not differentially impact participants’ adherence to this assigned goal. The number of walks participants took within 1 week did not differ between those assigned to the narrowed attention (M = 3.8, SD = 2.1) and natural attention conditions (M = 3.2, SD = 2.2), t(119) = 1.44, p = .15, d = .28. Similarly, the amount of time participants spent on average during each walk did not differ between those assigned to the narrowed attention (M = 16.3, SD = 15.3) and natural attention condition (M = 13.1, SD = 14.7), t(119) = 1.14, p = .23, d = .21.
Predicting efficiency in exercise
Although individuals assigned to the narrowed attention strategy did not walk more often during the week nor did they spend more time exercising during each goal-directed walk, they did traverse 60% farther on average per walk than individuals assigned to use the natural attention strategy. Confirming the primary hypothesis, we found that those using narrowed attention walked 0.75 miles (SD = 0.75) on average per walk, whereas individuals using natural attention covered 0.47 miles per walk (SD = 0.36), t(118) = 2.59, p = .011, d = .533. Similarly, we found that those in the narrowed attention condition took about 85% more steps per walk than those in the natural attention condition; when using narrowed attention, individuals averaged 1,467 steps per walk (SD = 1,550.1), whereas individuals using natural attention averaged 791 steps per walk (SD = 659.6), t(118) = 3.09, p = .003, d = .48.
General Discussion
The beneficial effects of physical activity are numerous (e.g., Warburton et al., 2006). Exercise lowers the risk of heart disease, hypertension, stroke, type 2 diabetes, depression, obesity, and some cancers; it facilitates weight control, strengthens bones and muscles, improves mood, mental health, and psychological well-being, and facilitates longer life spans (e.g., Dishman, Heath, & Lee, 2013). We aimed with this work to explore processes and factors that promote frequent and intense exercise.
The current research builds on prior work suggesting that narrowed scope of attention improves exercise (e.g., Balcetis & Dunning, 2010; Cole & Balcetis, 2013; Cole, Balcetis, & Dunning, 2013). Specifically, these studies demonstrated that narrowed attentional scope facilitated improved physical activity in daily life by promoting more intense activity (Studies 2 and 4) and repeated engagement in exercises such as walking or running over time (Studies 1a, 1b, and 3). Moreover, narrowed attentional scope may facilitate exercise among at-risk populations, including racial minorities living in low-income urban housing developments (Study 1a). Finally, there is little to no evidence that the effects of our attention strategy are driven by participants’ awareness of study hypotheses and any possible resulting demand effects (Study 5, reported in full in supplemental material).
The Impact of Attention on Motivation, Mind-Set, and Shielding
We found consistent evidence that narrowed attention improves the rate and speed of activity on behavior in general. However, it remains uncertain as to whether the effects of narrowed attention on activity are unique to individuals who hold the goal to lose weight. Some secondary analyses we conducted produced patterns suggesting beneficial impacts of narrowed attentional scope on physical activity for those with weight loss goals (Studies 1a and 2). Moreover, in two studies we constrained the nature of the task such that all participants were assigned an exercise goal (Studies 3 and 4). These data are consistent with theorizing that suggests self-regulatory strategies are particularly effective when implemented at the goal striving stage (i.e., Gollwitzer, 1990; Lewin, Dembo, Festinger, & Sears, 1944). In other words, attention-based strategies could improve the frequency and efficiency of activity among people who have already committed to a health goal.
We note, however, that some of our secondary analyses probing the moderating effect of weight-related goals on the beneficial effects of narrowed attentional scope within our samples in which it was measured rather than manipulated were not significant. Therefore, although theory suggests this strategy may be particularly effective among those committed to the goal, empirically within our studies, it remains uncertain as to whether the effects of narrowed attention on activity are conditional upon the strength of personal goals.
How precisely narrowed attentional scope facilitates goal-relevant action also remains an open question. Building upon other research providing evidence for the mechanistic effects of narrowed attentional scope, we postulate that narrowed visual attention leads to perceptions of goals as proximal, which increases task feasibility and reduces anticipated and experienced difficulty and pain when exercising (Balcetis et al., 2015; Cole et al., 2014). Narrowed attention may facilitate goal striving, even over extended periods of time as tested in this article, to the degree that exercise is expected to be and is actually experienced as easier to complete, which promotes continued action.
We conjectured that narrowed attentional scope may increase task ease through two processes based on existing theory. First, immediate rather than delayed expected rewards foster improved performance (Woolley & Fishbach, 2017). Narrowed attentional scope may increase the immediacy of expected reward. Second, narrowed attentional scope may facilitate goal visualization. Goals that are easy rather than hard to visualize facilitate effort and commitment, and evidence suggests that perceiving oneself as closer to the goal strengthens the motivating effect of visualization (Cheema & Bagchi, 2011). For instance, Olympic-level swimmers competing in the preliminary competitions in the 2004 and 2008 games swam faster as they swam toward the finish line rather than away from it, suggesting that being able to visualize the end improved performance (Cheema & Bagchi, 2011).
It is also possible that narrowed attentional scope clarifies the nature of the goal; indeed, more specific rather than vague goals improve performance (Locke, Mento, & Katcher, 1978). In Studies 1a, 1b, and 2, we do not assess the specificity of participants’ goals; as a result, our measure of attentional narrowing might covary with the specificity of individuals’ set goals. However, in our experimental studies (Studies 3 and 4), we induced a specific goal for all participants, and we conceptually replicated the predicted effects of narrowed attentional scope on physical activity. The consistency of our effects across studies where the vagaries of the goals are left unspecified or are assigned as specific leads us to believe that the mechanism responsible for our observed effects of attentional scope is unlikely to be related to differences in the type of goal participants set.
Although we doubt that attentional scope shifts the type of goals pursued, it is possible that attentional scope may limit the number of goals simultaneously engaged. Past research has suggested, for instance, sustained attention directed to goal-relevant information promotes self-regulatory success by shielding the focal goal from interference by peripheral or competing goals (Dreisbach & Haider, 2009; Hofmann, Schmeichel, & Baddeley, 2012). In a similar way, visual attention may serve as an indirect form of inhibitory control. That said, narrowing the scope of visual attention may have unique outcomes, including producing a representation of the goal as nearer to the self, that we would not necessarily expect of techniques that induce goal shielding through the cognitive components of sustained attention. Limiting one’s thoughts, for instance, to just exercising may not create a perceptual experience of a finish line as more proximal. Our effects of narrowed attentional scope then expand upon the goal shielding literature to provide another technique to shield focal goals from interference, though do so by way of shifting representations of the environment in which the goal is pursued.
Strategic Use of Narrowed Attentional Scope
Narrowed attention may not improve exercise in all situational contexts. The utility of narrowed attention is likely constrained to natural environments rich in visual cues. We do not expect, for instance, that narrowed attention would prove effective for individuals exercising on a treadmill or stationary bike, or in scenarios in which no visible goals or targets are present. In instances where surroundings are unchanging, alternate strategies, such as cognitive distraction, might be more effective (i.e., Annesi, 2001).
This work also raises the question of at what point during exercise the narrowed attention strategy would best be implemented. It is possible, for instance, that individuals in the beginning stages of goal pursuit might benefit from expanded attention. When focusing on single, narrow means to goal attainment might otherwise be demotivating (e.g., Huang & Zhang, 2013), such broadened attention could increase enjoyment and the value of exercise, ultimately promoting general physical activity (e.g., Kruglanski, Chernikova, Rosenzweig, & Kopetz, 2014). Similarly, those engaging in physical activity for longer periods of time and across greater distances, such as marathon runners, may benefit most from strategic use of multiple strategies. Given that narrowed attentional scope increases expectations for improved task performance, efficacy, and anticipated ease of successful task completion (Balcetis et al., 2015), it could be most impactful during periods of extreme physical duress, such as when marathon runners “hit the wall” at the end of the race when physical and mental resources are limited (Buman, Tuccitto, & Giacobbi, 2007).
Concluding Remarks
While substantial health benefits require adults to exercise a minimum of 30 min at least 5 days a week, 73% of Americans fail to meet that goal (Mendes, 2009). Because as little as 1 hr of moderate physical activity per day reduces individuals’ risk of early morbidity by 40% compared with this average (Arem et al., 2015), strategies with the potential to promote even minimal increases in activity could improve individuals’ well-being. This research offers narrowed visual attentional scope a possibility for improving these statistics.